[Music]
please welcome Richard wolf to Google
[Applause]
okay thank you all for spending time a
little bit with me let me tell you
exactly what I'm going to do and then
try to do it I want to tell you about
the economic system in which you live
and like any object of people trying to
figure things out there have been
differences about how to understand
economic systems from the beginning I
don't want to bore you by taking you
back to any economics class you may
remember having had in college if your
experience was like mine this is a
memory you'd rather not bring back for
good reason usually but if you some of
it is still in your mind you may recall
that people like Adam Smith and David
Ricardo and Karl Marx and John Stuart
Mill and John Keynes and a whole lot of
other people whose names you've probably
heard all tried to analyze the economy
but they ended up many of them doing it
in radically different ways and I mean
really different they didn't see the
same thing when they looked at the
economy they didn't understand the
mechanisms that make it work they didn't
understand in the same way where it was
going that is it's been a field
characterized by fundamental differences
as big a difference as whether you
believe the Sun goes around the earth or
the other way around
and many other examples that I could
give and that's never changed economics
has been what philosophers call an
agonistic field at place in which
different ways of understanding the
economy contest with one another I get
out some win some lose and those losers
sometimes come back and win later let me
give you an example that you may know
about
because the Great Depression of the
1930s the confidence in the capitalist
system being able to solve its problems
as they arose collapsed the 1929 to 1941
the United States had unemployment rates
hovering around 20 to 25 percent at five
or six times the unemployment we have
now and what we had now was a problem
try to imagine that those were years the
1930s when the total output of goods and
services shrank each year from what it
was the year before it's not surprising
that people who were living in a
capitalist system worked like that raise
lots of questions and then there were
those who believed oh no it's okay it's
a temporary thing nothing to worry about
the system is wonderfully configured in
such a way that it can solve its
problems and it will just wait six
months a year another year and so on but
there were too many people suffering too
much to wait and one a brilliant one
fellow in England named John Maynard
Keynes basically had the courage to
stand up and say this system isn't
working and if we continue to keep our
faith in it despite the fact that it is
working in obvious ways that we can see
every day he mentioned by the way people
sleeping in doorways in London where he
he was British people out of work in
huge numbers people whose wages were
going down not up
etc etc he said if we don't face it
there's going to be a revolution when I
could have any capitalism at all he
liked capitalism but he felt that
letting things be handled by the private
sector was self-destructive lunacy and
he developed an analysis which we now
call Keynesian economics but it saw the
economy radically different from what
preceded it and that Keynesian became
the dominant economics in the world for
most of the period roughly the 1940s to
the 1970s and then it was all pushed out
and we
had a return of what existed before the
1930s was almost as if the memory of the
Great Depression and all the troubles
that had and by the way if you're
interested you know John Steinbeck is
good willing to read give you a feeling
of the Great Depression if you've never
read that or seen the movies of Grapes
of Wrath or mice and then in the 1970s
it all went the other way the Keynesian
were deformed and we started looking at
the economy again in a different way
that's the time of Reagan manufactured
the private economy which had been
excoriated for failing in the Great
Depression was suddenly rehabilitated
and made the be-all and end-all that
would solve everything 70s 80s 90s it
would have continued except in 2008 this
capitalist system we live in crashed
again his second time in 75 years we're
talking a major collapse for those of
you don't follow these things in the
autumn of 2008 September to December
here in New York we came that close to
an economy that would have stopped
functioning by stopped functioning I
mean the kinds of things you don't think
can happen but we came that close no
milk no bread no buses no nothing
terrible we're still in the after
effects of that here we are almost a
decade later like the Great Depression
it has raised again the question gee
what about this economic system only now
we have to ask it in a different way and
that's really what I want to talk to you
about because we can't go back and
repeat our own history we can't now say
well let's bring the government back in
the way Keynes believed you needed to do
fix this capitalist system manage this
capitalist system because if you leave
it to itself to leave it to the business
community look what happened in 1929 and
what happened in 2008 again and these
are cataclysms you read every few weeks
now about an election like the one a
couple weeks ago in France that in which
the entire society is being roiled
around by the consequences of an
economic system isn't working real well
and is producing new kinds of political
characters even here in the United
States we have what at least most of us
think of as a pretty weird political
scene these days don't we and that's not
just because a particular fellow got in
it's because of all the conditions that
made it possible for him to get in and
to do what he's doing okay so let's talk
about this capitalist system remembering
that people have always disagreed the
debates were not only between those who
loved capitalism and felt it should be
handled by the private business
community being able to do it fame
deregulate let the economy work versus
the Keynesian 's who love the system but
said in order to make it work the
government has to come in and make
things happen because left to itself the
system collapses like in 29 and 2008
turns out those who are not the only two
perspectives there's also a perspective
that says the problems of capitalism go
far deeper than whether or not there's
more or less government intervention for
such people this whole issue is
secondary what's their point of view and
it's the one I want to present to you a
little bit their point of view is that
if you look at the capitalist system
with or without government intervention
all the key levers of power are in the
hands of the people who run that
institution which is now the place where
most production of goods and services
happens and that institution is called
the corporation the capitalist
corporation we are discussing this in
one of them aren't we it is a powerful
institution as you all know and so this
approach says let's take a look at how
it works and see what consequences come
from that before I do it I need to tell
you honestly and clearly where this
approach comes from this looking at the
organization of production as it is done
in a corporation which is the dominant
form of modern capitalism the origin of
this way of thinking is in the hands of
critics of capitalism this point of view
comes from people down through a couple
hundred years at capitalism has been the
dominant system in the world it's not
very old like every other system slavery
feudalism any of the others capitalism
has always had people who love it and
people who hate it just about like
everything else
critics admirers celebrants skeptics and
one about to tell you is a tradition
which some of you I'm sure know of
criticism of capitalism it has many
contributors but the name that has come
to dominate is the name of Karl Marx and
this is often called Marxian economics
in the sense that it's influenced more
or less than varies from individual to
individual by the critical way that Karl
Marx developed his analysis of
capitalism I'm not sure whether I should
take the moment out to remind you all of
who call Marx was but then again maybe
it's worthwhile Karl Marx was born in
1818 that's very important because
that's the first generation after the
French Revolution and Marx was a
tremendous admirer of the French
Revolution the slogans on the banners of
the French liberty equality fraternity
those were the three
words of that revolution in 1789 were
absolutely the the love of the whole
generation of which Marx was a part and
they will understood the French
Revolution pretty much in the same way
that what the French did was to get rid
of feudalism the old system and bring in
capitalism the new system and that by
doing so they would bring in liberty
equality and fraternity or to use the
modern language a democratic system much
Marx came a little later so Marx was
able by the time he becomes a young man
to see about 50 years worth of
development of capitalism in Europe
began in England moves to France and the
Low Countries and then spread eventually
to the whole world Marx was fifty years
in and he looked around Western Germany
that's where was born France where he
lived a bit and then in England Whelan
most of his adult life he looked around
and he by the way this the England of
Dickens so if you won't understand what
he was seeing
remember Oliver Twist the England of his
time was certainly capitalist feudalism
was gone so was Paris
so was fine furred and Marx acknowledged
that capitalism was a dynamic developing
system but where was the liberty
equality and fraternity nowhere it
wasn't any again if you want to see what
I mean we Dickens will describe to you
the absence of liberty equality and
fraternity in 25 ways or if you want the
French versions Balzac poor Zola or any
of the others who were writing about
these periods so Marx young radical that
he was from an upper middle class family
educated at the University which means
he's one of the three or four percent of
the people who had such an education at
that time he drew a conclusion
the French Revolution was wonderful for
bringing in capitalism but capitalism it
turned out was not the vehicle or the
means to bring people liberty equality
or fraternity and so his lifework was to
answer the question why not what is it
about capitalism in the 19th century
which is when he lived that prevented it
from bringing the liberty equality
fraternity democracy all those wonderful
things and I'm going to tell you his
conclusions I'm going to go back and see
how he got to it and why he got to it
his conclusion was that capitalism was
not only unable to bring it but that
capitalism was a fundamental obstacle to
ever achieving it and that therefore the
human race it wanted liberty equality
fraternity and democracy we have to
devise a system other and different from
capitalism or else spend its entire
lives bumping up against the limits of a
system that cannot allow for has never
allowed for liberty equality fraternity
or democracy not really okay so how does
Marx get to this and why am i I'm going
to present an analysis of it to you well
let's go back to the corporation that
instrument that institution through
which goods and services are produced
everything everything Google makes is
the product of the Google Corporation
which the Google corporation make sure
we know as all other corporations do
likewise it's the institutional form in
which the work gets done the more
materials or tools the equipment to
produce the output which is then
marketed around the world that's how
it's done and in Marx's image in Marx's
head
therein lies the problem how is that
organized
let's look he said closely into this
and then he did and again I'm going to
save us a lot of time by summarizing
what he found and wide so and relevant
his analysis goes something like this
the workplace the corporation but by the
way it applies if you're not
incorporated if you're an unincorporated
business or a partnership or a family
outfitted the analysis applies there too
but since most production in the United
States is organized in corporations and
more and more around the world - that's
the appropriate institution for me to
focus on in the corporation something
very interesting happens every day the
key decision-makers are two groups of
people one group are the shareholders
the people who literally in the way
capitalism works own the corporation by
owning shares of it they're literally
shares of ownership shares however are
only owned in the main by rich people or
by a few institutions to give you just
one statistic here from the United
States one percent of shareholders own
about two-thirds of the shares if you
ever wonder who the 1% are that folks
talk about that's as good a group as any
they are the major shareholders we call
them in economics they're literally a
handful of people in most corporations
that is your grandmother may have left
you and she died eleven shares of
something but you're not a major
shareholders may come as a shock and I
don't want to upset you but you're not a
major share a major shareholder owns
millions of shares can be a bank and be
a wealthy person can be a foundation is
a variety of holders of these major
shares
let's tiny group 20 50 people oops
institutions own all the shares except
for the handful and grandmother's leave
as parting gifts
and the way a corporation works again
for those of you who not familiar
once a year there's an election and
shares vote for something called the
Board of Directors that's usually a
group of 12 to 20 people they're on the
board of directors if you ever wondered
some of you may have had as a career
objective to become a member of a Board
of Directors you probably notice that
that's a good place to be and so I'm not
about to tell you how to do that you
have to get elected by the shareholders
that's how everybody got there once a
year the shareholders have a vote and
here's how the vote works you get one
vote for every share you own so if your
grandmother left you 11 chairs you get
11 votes if you are Chase Manhattan Bank
and you own for your various accounts 27
billion shares then the vice-president
you send to the annual meeting of the
shareholders votes to 20 million shares
you could think that you're just like
him but you understand you're not if 1
percent of the people owned bulk of the
shares that's the 1% who decide all
these elections that's indeed how it
normally works so the 12 or 15 people
that are on the board of directors they
make the decisions sometimes with more
influence from the major shareholders if
they muddled in there sometimes with
less but it really doesn't matter
because even if you add together the 15
to 20 individuals who on the board of
directors to the 10 or 20 or 30
individuals or major shareholders those
people that 50 people more or less make
all of the key decisions for every
corporation that works like this which
is 99 percent of them let me be clear
with you so we all are on the same page
this board of directors decides what the
company produces what objects are made
what services and goods are produced
number two how they will be produced for
technology will be used number three
where the production will take place and
finally what to do with the profits that
all of this work generates this Board of
Directors and the major shells make all
those decisions those are the key
decisions any enterprise ever makes
meanwhile there is a large number of
people five hundred a thousand ten
thousand a hundred thousand hundreds of
thousands millions who are employees of
the corporation they all of course have
to live with the decisions that the
board of directors and the major
shareholders make well let's give you an
example we're going to close this
factory or office here in New York and
we're going to move it to China had a
nice day or we're going to substitute
these machines for these working people
and lay them off have a nice day we're
going to take the profits to which the
labor of all the employees contributed
and we're going to decide to use it for
an advertising budget or beautiful new
shrubbery outside the main office or
whatever it is we want because that's
who we are we make the decision who's
the we the board of directors 15 to 20
people and the major shareholders
another 20 30 people Marx finds this
intriguing and so do I this is an
interesting way to make the fundamental
economic decisions of a society because
what you are essentially doing and
saying whether you face up to it or not
as a culture is it it's going to be a
tiny group of people who make all the
key decisions that everybody else has to
live from on and with but now to drive
the point home the mass of people the
employees
to begin with but the larger community
in which every corporation lives and
functions they all have to live with the
consequences but they are excluded from
participating in making the decision let
me say that again to make real sure it's
with us the mass of people in our
economic system are required to live
with the consequences of the decisions
made by the corporate leadership
decisions from which they are excluded
legally and in practice de jure and de
facto whatever else you call this system
it is not democratic in the communities
where we live we insist upon having
votes we say that the mayor or the
governor or the senator or the president
makes decisions that we all have to live
with and therefore we who have to live
with the decisions must be able to
participate in making them but when we
go to work in the capitalist system we
cross the threshold into the office the
store or the factory and we put all of
that aside we don't commend it we don't
require it and we don't have it now back
to Marx here in in that situation I just
described summarily for you Marx said
lies the reason why capitalism despite
its hopes and dreams of the people who
brought us capitalism that it would
usher in liberty equality fraternity has
proven itself unable to do that because
it turns out Marx argues that if you put
the power of directing what goes on in
an economy in the hands of a tiny number
of people you can't really be surprised
if they make the decisions that keeps
them in that charmed place can you
so why are we surprised to learn as I'm
sure many of you know that over the last
40 years for example here in the United
States just to take an example
corporations boards of directors and
major shareholders have decided to take
the profits that everyone helped to
produce by the way do you know how we
know that everyone helps to produce the
profits you know how that happens that
happens every year the proof of it at
the Christmas party that's when the
chief executive a little wobbly from too
much punch gets up on a chair and thanks
everybody for the contribution every
person in this firm made to our
successful year and then having thanked
you the Chairman and the other members
of the board go off and decide what to
do with what you kindly helped to
produce so it shouldn't come as a
surprise if the last 40 years turns out
that what has happened is that those
corporations those boards of directors
and major shareholders decided to take a
huge part of the profits that were
earned and give it to themselves in the
form of dividends to shareholders which
is what they are and spec' particular
pay packages to the chief executives who
are on boards of directors this should
surprise nobody but let's take some
other examples that are remarkable
corporations have decided and Google is
an important player in this to do what
we call an economics automation over the
last 3040 years we had really replaced
huge numbers of jobs that people hold by
computers and robots it's very
interesting that is driven by profit the
boards of directors calculate they bring
an economist like me and they calculate
what we would pay for workers and all
those versus what it would cost to buy
and maintain these computers these
robots whatever the automation form is
and they make the decision based on
what's better
for their profits could that's how
corporations work that's what they do
and then they make an interesting
decision if the machinery is more
profitable they buy it they install it
and they turn to the workers and they
say you're fired have a nice day and
those workers go off and have maybe a
nice day probably not they're fired
they're unemployed okay we have no idea
how I take that back we do know what
happens to that in stunning numbers they
get depressed they get sick they start
desperately looking for jobs if they
don't find them pretty soon they start
being willing to accept jobs that they
are overtrained for jobs they are
underpaid for etc etc they may get angry
they may do violent things the social
costs of all of this are staggering and
always have been but that's none of the
problem of the corporation it bears in a
capitalist system new responsibility for
that at all if there are costs of laying
all those people off those are the
problems of those people none of their
friends and relatives neighbors and the
communities in which they live to
struggle with as best they can mark says
this is really interesting because in
many situations it's easier to show
don't need to be a Marxist for that that
the social costs of the unemployed are
much larger than the profits gained by
the private corporations who made the
decision to fire these people but
because the private corporations got the
profit without having to pay the cost it
was profitable for them even though it
was socially an unprofitable move to
make the way the system works okay now
let's put it all together
marx argues that leaving things in the
hands of the capitalist corporation and
you can see now why a bit more
government intervention or a bit less is
really beside the point because with
more or less government intervention you
are not changing the basic way the
capitalist enterprise is organized with
a tiny group of people making all the
key decisions and doing so in a way that
replicates their situation
understandably
and unfortunately replicates that of
everybody else too
along the way in fact let's even push it
further as Marxist should if the
government doesn't just regulate but
let's suppose the government goes a step
further fires all the private boards of
directors takes the property away from
the shareholders and says this is now a
government enterprise and then puts into
the board of directors not individuals
elected by shareholders they're all gone
but officials designated by the state
apparatus you twenty people will now run
this factory that's a little bit like
what happened in the Soviet Union in
nineteen seventy I didn't work out too
well either and why because it didn't
change the internal structure of that
enterprise yes instead of privately
elected people as in private capitalism
they had state officials interesting
change that doesn't change the
fundamental problem and Marx told it to
that as the issue the way this is
organized is fundamentally antagonistic
to ever getting liberty equality or
fraternity or democracy if that's what
you're interested in now this is a very
powerful way of analyzing things but
Marx was a very sophisticated thinker
and wanted to drive it home in the most
intimate way that one can by looking
very cool
mostly at the employer-employee
relationship and again this is an
elaborate piece of work he did take some
time to work through and I'm going to
give you a heroic short summary but I
think you'll understand it real well
let's start with the employee who's
looking for a job could be me could be
you and you go and you meet an employer
who's got a job and you sit down and you
discuss it and the employer explains you
to come you know Monday through Friday
at 8:30 and you stay till 4:30 or
whatever it is you'll sit over there you
do work with this machine on that piece
of paper whatever it is and then you get
to that touchy point how much you're
going to get paid and to make my example
very simple let's just use the number
twenty bucks an hour you're going to be
paid twenty dollars an hour for whatever
it is you just came to work at that
point mark says let's stop stop the film
stop the whole thing and let's be clear
about what happens here because
everybody kind of knows it and yet
hasn't faced it and I suspect that still
true
having been a professor of economics for
50 years helps you to get a sense of
whether it's true or not
you know Marx makes it very clear but
you know what I'm about to say that the
only reason any employer will ever give
you $20 for an hour of your work is this
that our adding you to whatever the
payroll already is hiring you in that
hour you're going to make more goods or
services for that company to sell than
they would have if they didn't hire you
they know that that's why they're hiring
you you're either going to make a better
quantity or a better quality of whatever
it is they produce and the company's
calculation is it is worth it for me to
hire you for $20 if and only if
the extra hour of your labor will yield
to mean the employer more than $20 worth
of extra output for me to sell if it
doesn't I won't hire you because it
would be absurd I would give you $20
you'd work for an hour I'd sell the
results of your extra work for 19
dollars and I'd be down 1 buck I got an
MBA I know it's not good I'm not going
to do that but this has enormous
implications first of all this is tough
on Americans it means that if you've
spent a lifetime telling yourself you're
never going to work for anybody who
doesn't pay you what you're worth I've
got me a bad news for you that never
happened and it never will that kind of
statement to yourself is your way of
avoiding to deal with the system in
which you live and I feel for you you
need help but not the kind I provide you
live in a system in which the basis of
the corporation is that difference or to
use Marxist language the worker produces
a surplus over what he gets and that's
the name of the system is to get it and
to accumulate it Wow so what have we got
in capitalism we've got a system that
has delivered us to extraordinary
qualities it has delivered us stunning
instability I always use the same joke
at this point in what I present if you
lived with a person as unstable as this
economic system you would have moved out
on the gold in 1929 it crashes crash
less 11 years in 2008 it crashes was
still in it for those of you who don't
know there's an agency in the United
States called the National Bureau of
Economic Research which keeps track of
the
business cycles polite term recall for
instability between the end of the Great
Depression 1941 and the beginning of
what we're in now 2008 there were 11
more economic downturns every president
of the United States had been a
president over a downturn that's how
unstable the system is and every
president has promised during the
downturn that if we just do whatever the
things are he thinks we ought to do we
will overcome that crisis overcome that
downturn and never have another one
every president promised it no president
has ever delivered on his promise that's
why were in one now they all promised
they can't do it the system's
instability has been with it from the
beginning we average an economic
downturn every four to seven years in
capitalism for 300 years no matter where
capitalism has come to that is what it
brings with it
Keynes in economics was an attempt to
cope with it
didn't work out we're still trying we're
still debating it we live with a system
that periodically throws millions of
people out of work undoes their family
life under undermines their education
'he's transformed it's it's unbelievable
what we expect and what we accept and
the other thing capitalism has done
stunningly is produce an inequality that
is mind-bending of course it's easy to
see why if the boards of directors and
the major shareholders decide what to do
with the profits and give a lot of it to
themselves bingo
we've explained inequality no mystery
here we don't need to do a lot of
studies that's been answered that
question but the problem is it's the
system that produces the inequality not
this or that law this or that rule or
this or that political candidate this is
a systemic problem like our instability
the agency that keeps track of
inequality in the world the best one is
Oxfam in England some of you may
know about it you should report every
year our world inequality the famous
number this last year was that something
on the order of 86 of the richest people
in the world together have more wealth
than the bottom half of the population
of the planet that's about three and a
half billion people a folks this is a
level of inequality that takes us back
to the pyramids capitalism's achievement
is a level of inequality and instability
that should have long ago made people
question what are we doing
staying in living with accepting
especially uncritically a system that
works like this but now a personal note
if any of this strikes you as remarkable
or new world maybe hopefully even
interesting I'm a product of the
American economic system and I'm a
product of the American education system
I've been poor I was born United States
lived here all my life
this economic analysis I've just
summarily presented to you in 40 minutes
I had to acquire on my own why because
the institutions of they like to call it
higher learning always used to wonder
what what then would be lower learning
then put inside institutions of higher
learning they didn't teach me any of
this let me stress that none of it so
let me tell you about my education
because it helped drive the point home
as an undergraduate I went to Harvard I
graduated magna laude from Harvard
that's supposed to mean something then I
went to Stanford out in Palo Alto and
got a master's degree in economics and
then I should switch to my professor
that I loved there died and finished at
Yale where I got another masters in
economics and masters in history and a
PhD in economics or time now listen to
this
never in my education in those three
institutions in an economics course was
I ever assigned one word of Karl Marx
there is no excuse no justification
method you know what that's about here
my professors were afraid to assign it
to read it to think about it to discuss
it or to debate it was the Cold War when
I went to school and we the Americans
were arrayed against the Russians like
some are today and others clearly not so
much well it's very hard to keep this
straight you have to know what color
who's got what jersey otherwise I get
confused as to who the friends and
allies or it is very confusing my
professors were not confused was real
clear so we weren't taught anything
about any of this we were taught
neoclassical economics that's capitalism
as wonderful fixes itself love them to
worry about go back to watching TV and
the Keynesian is an order something to
worry about let the get the government
come in but the notion that there was a
critical alternative to this way of
thinking that came up with a different
analysis and a different way of thinking
and a different set of ideas of what we
need to do next oh no none of my
teachers ever said one word about it try
to understand this is like a taboo they
couldn't discuss it
some of you been wondering why we have
economic troubles here in the United
States we seem so clumsy about solving
them we have had to pretend in economics
that we don't have any problems that we
don't have a fundamentally troubled
system that we don't have anything
worried about which means you're not
you're good at fixing it when it breaks
down for that you'd have to face that it
has lots of flaws you have to look at
how it broke down before and see what it
is that might be in this we don't so you
live in an economic system that is now
run by people who have no idea about
everything I just told you this is
painful
I've had to teach all my life the
conventional neoclassical Keynesian but
I'm also taught this other I know what
my colleagues do but they don't
understand what I do I'm not the only
one I'm not suggesting that but I'm a
critic of the system because it makes
sense to me that a system that works in
the way I described deserve some
criticism and I even dare to suggest
that intelligent folks like you could
thrive on hearing the criticism and
thinking about it accept all of it of
course not but think about it engage it
come on if you wanted to understand the
family up the road that had two parents
and two kids would you decide to
interview one of the two children not to
especially if you knew that one of the
children follow was the best family in
the world the other children of a child
thought this was a basket case of
psychological dysfunction probably most
of you would understand you got to talk
to both of the children son you make up
your own mind hear what they have to say
here the people who think capitalism is
the best thing since sliced bread
but maybe also take a dear listen to the
people who think it's critical
who think it's a system that never could
do what it had promised and finally and
I'm going to conclude with this a system
that is in no way necessary what are we
what are we accepting it's not
inevitable it never was
Oh true the people who like capitalism
love to say it's the end of history it's
the final stage but the people who
articulated slavery said to add the
people who articulated feudalism said
that so of course the people who run
capitalism say that but the burdens on
them every system we know of in human
history has been born evolved over time
and died we know capitalism was born we
know it's evolved you know what the next
stage is well I won't go into that you
can figure that out what would be an
alternative in a way everything I've
said gives you the answer if we have a
system that's unstable if we have a
system that produces unspeakable
inequality a system that makes it
profitable to fire large numbers of
people even if the social costs of their
unemployment exceed the profits that the
automation achieved all of the things
I've told you and many more those are
all every one of them the results of how
decisions are made inside the productive
units of our economy the factories the
stores and the offices by a tiny group
of people who are not accountable to the
people they employ the people they
employ the majority the people who are
not accountable or the minority that's
why it's not democracy it's the
antithesis well then the solution jumps
right out at you
democratize the enterprise make the
decisions something that is done
one-person one-vote everybody who works
in an enterprise has an equal say in
deciding what to produce how to produce
where to produce and what to do with the
profits that they all helped to produce
what a wonderful interesting idea
democracy in the workplace just think of
a society in which you have not just
democracy where you live but democracy
where you work if it was good for the
one it is good for the other maybe
getting rid of the Kings who told us
what to do where we live is like getting
rid of the Board of Directors who tells
us what to do where we worked because
you know what kind of matters being at
work is what you do most of the adult
life you have is the one work if
democracy is a value that means
something to you it should have been
instituted long ago where you work
because that's where you spend most of
your time instead you accept what to
live in a society you like to call
democratic even though the place where
you spend most of your time is the
antithesis of that your workplace the
alternative is very old democratizing
the workplace not a new idea
now that's ancient nowadays it's called
worker coops so as good a name as any
what does it mean a group of people
getting together and making a decision
we're going to produce something a
software program hamburgers haircuts
it doesn't matter and here's how we're
going to do it we're going to be a
collective we're going together to
decide how to produce we're to produce
when to produce all of that and we're
going to debate it and then we're going
to make a decision by majority vote
that's what we're going to do we're
going to run it
human beings have been trying to do that
for a long time but you may not know is
that human beings have done it often you
may not know that human beings are doing
it right now all over the place
including in the United States and one
of the reasons it's a perennial effort
is because the systems that have existed
slavery feudalism capitalism provoked
people to be critical and to find their
way sooner or later to this alternative
I'll give you just two examples as I
bring this to a close the most famous
example is as a corporation in Spain
some of you may have heard about it it's
called the Mondragon cooperative
corporation here's the story of this
company in 1956 Spain which is where
this company exists and is based Spain
was a very poor country it had gone
through a horrific civil war and then it
was World War 2 Spain was a poor country
to begin with and it was devastated by
the civil war and then by World War two
so in 1956 it was a very poor country
and in the Basque region that's the
northern part of Spain on the southern
side of the Pyrenees Mountains that
separates Spain from France the Basque
people who are their own kind of
ethnicity if you like they have their
own language and culture very very poor
their Roman Catholic as are most people
in Spain and they had a local priest and
he made a famous joke one day at church
he said if we wait to have jobs for some
capitalists or some employer to come
here we'll all die of old age so what I
suggest he said is that we become our
own employer in other words set up a
worker co-op which he did six workers
and a priest fast forward to today
Mondragon corporation Mondragon
cooperative corporation is the seventh
largest corporation in Spain it has a
hundred thousand workers it is the
biggest success story of the Spanish
economy in the last half sin
it is a collection of 150 to 200
depending on how you count worker coops
in every one of its businesses it's a
conglomerate services manufacturing and
so on in every one of its businesses the
workers collectively decide all of these
issues what to produce how to produce
where to produce stunningly successful
out competed dozens of capitalist
enterprises who could not make it work
in competition with them they're so
successful now that they have their own
University the Mondragon University
which will teach courses to anybody
who's interested in how to organize a
co-op how to finance a co-op have a
manager co-op how to deal with the
personnel problems of coops etc so
well-developed program very successful
two interesting rules that might excite
you rule number one
the workers together hire and fire and
evaluate the managers I know I have to
let that sink in in other words it's the
opposite of what you have the workers
decide whether the managers were
successful and if they weren't they're
gone they also have another rule the
highest-paid person cannot get more than
eight times the income of the lowest
paid person that's how they solve the
problem of inequality just God not an
issue there is some inequality 8 to 1 is
still a hefty ratio but I assume you
know that the ratio of corporate CEOs to
low paid workers in American
corporations is around 350 to 1 which is
why we have the inequality that we have
and there are many more examples a
worker co-op would solve its problems in
a different way be a different economic
system here's an interesting thing
imagine the corporation confronted with
the notion Gini you know why are you
hiring Americans who you have to pay a
large amount of money to why don't you
move to India we didn't pay much less
capitalist corporation as you know has
been doing a lot to that worker coop
unlikely the workers would be voting to
destroy their jobs their company the
benefits to the community of having the
jobs they're filling under that you
wouldn't have seen the exodus of jobs
from this country for the last 30 to 40
years it's really different
much less inequality much worse lawsuit
the whole everything would be changed if
we were able to have a rational
discussion debate here in the United
States about a capitalist economic
system versus a worker cooperative
system maybe we would even be able to
imagine an economic system starting out
as capitalist but which makes room for a
large worker co-op sector across many
industries and you know what the
rationale for it would be freedom of
choice let Americans have the choice you
want to work in a top-down hierarchical
corporation would you rather work in a
democratic workplace would you like to
buy from the one would you like to for
Americans to have that choice there has
to be a sector we'd have to spend some
money and make room for worker coops and
there is a country just doing it right
now
committed to doing it anyway and that'll
be my final point just to make clear
that the reality of this is not some
fancy in the future utopian dream the
second biggest political party in Great
Britain is called the Labour Party the
leader of the Labour Party a man named
Jeremy Corbyn he that his party has
committed they're running in a national
election right now his party has
committed it and they've won governments
before they like the Democratic Party
here the Republican here is the
Conservatives in England so he's
committed that if the labour party wins
they'll pass this law
part-1 any existing business in England
can continue as it is but if it decides
to call
and or if it decides to sell itself to
another business and or if it decides to
go public the issue shares it must
before doing any of those things give
its own workers the right of first
refusal it's a legal term meaning it has
to offer to sell itself to its own
workers as a co-op before it can do
anything else part 2 of the bill answers
the question where would the workers get
the money to buy their own firm answer
the government will lend it to them the
British are committed to building a
worker co-op sector precisely because of
the problems limits failures of a
capitalist system but the most important
thing is not the particular arguments
for this the most important thing is for
you to face up to the fact you live in
an economic system that isn't the
beginning and end of anything that is
part of an evolving history that has
very serious flaws and faults and that
is an enormous literature including
concrete real experiences people have
had all over the place in doing better
than capitalism to insist that you don't
have to think about it you'll have to
debate it you don't have to listen to
people who tell you about it you don't
have to read the books that are there
for is a kind of self imposed censorship
that doesn't do anybody any good
unless you really want the current
system to continue no matter what the
cost and no matter where it takes us and
I don't believe most of you in this room
feel that way thank you very much for
your attention
[Applause]
at this time yeah we have just a couple
minutes for questions I think yeah go to
the mics go ahead I thank you for your
talk I really enjoyed it
I'm just wondering if you could speak
maybe briefly to the you offer up
democracy as kind of this solution that
some wondering if you can speak to the
efficacy of it specifically with
relation to dealing with the problems of
capitalism like why hasn't democracy as
a governing system dealt with this
problem and why won't it have similar in
efficiencies in the workplace sure try
to be as brief as I can Marx tried to
grapple with exactly that question and
basically he and the many who have come
since and tried to work with it make the
argument that in the practical life of a
capitalist corporation is a systemic
disregard negation rejection of
democracy and that inside the way the
corporation works how would rewards
disproportionately the people at the top
etc etc it creates conditions that
undermine what political democracy there
is and the best way to see that in this
country and again I'm sure most of you
know it is that we in America and in
many other countries we see our
elections bought and sold you can buy
the advertising that you need or you
can't if you can't your effort to run
politically is basically spy made from
the beginning it's not a coincidence
that most of the candidates either are
millionaires or depend on millionaires
to donate to them and the likelihood of
millionaires that are going to donate to
a critic of capitalism is slim in a
country like this unless and until a
movement develops that of course can
change all of that and in a way the
Bernie Sanders ability to raise large
amounts of money from small donations is
the beginning of signs in this country
that in a sense the jig is up but the
system is itself undemocratic and it
undercuts because it has to let me put
it in it the most dramatic way I can if
a society produces greater and greater
inequality you all understand what that
means tiny group of people a lot of
stuff and a lot of other people just
barely making ends meet the people who
have a lot they aren't stupid they
understand the danger of democracy and
of universal suffrage because sooner or
later of a tiny group of people have all
the wealth and everybody does and
everybody is going to think but one
thing we have is the vote one thing we
have is political democracy and we can
use our numerical majority in politics
to undo what capitalism has achieved in
economics we can do that by taxing we
can do that by expropriating there's a
lot of ways of doing that the rich
understand that they've got to make
they've got to neuter the political
system they can't let it function in the
appropriate way because too dangerous
for them and so they buy it that's been
the solution and I think that problem
has never been solved not by this law or
that law because it you could find a way
for these inequalities of wealth to
represent themselves in the political
system the notion of worker co-op is not
a notion that there will be pure
efficiency whatever exactly that is
economists do not agree on what
efficiency is or means or how to measure
it
but put that aside there will be in
efficiencies in a worker co-op they'll
be different from the inefficiencies
that capitalist enterprises have just as
the inefficiencies of capitalism were
different from those that feudalism had
and from those that slavery had
inefficiency is part of every economic
system always has been and is now it is
not efficient to have millions of people
who want a job and don't have one if you
want an introduction to capitalism's
inefficiency but I can introduce you to
the fact that every capitalist system
suffers from millions and millions of
people that are unemployed
or proportionally that's not an
efficiency that's a waste of people a
waste of potential and a waste of
resources other systems have different
in efficiencies but weighing them is not
a basis upon which you're going to
decide between systems and it never was
thank you very much for a interesting
for provoking talk so in in your view of
Knox's analysis of capitalism email you
will listen to what I believe will
believe the theory of value so that's an
idea I've gotten person is coming
they're coming for a lot of criticism
because if maybe I'm oversimplifying
here but you like the idea is it's good
hazards values company under pays its
workers in order to extract profits from
the difference between the value and
what a paper workers that idea let me to
take account for instances surprises the
continues are willing to pay for the
goods so I wasn't very help yes well
don't take this person your question de
speaks the very absence of teaching this
material that I was referring to before
if you actually read Marx and by the way
it's not that difficult I guarantee you
if you read Marx you'll know that he
makes a distinction between values and
prices he talks about prices and what
causes them he talks about values which
for him or something else nor is he the
only major economist who did that Smith
and Ricardo also did that so he tried to
use his analysis of value to say
whatever else in a commodity is a thing
produced in capitalism it has in it a
congealed amount of labour every society
has to make a decision whether it's
conscious of it or not how much labor
will we allocate to making food how much
will we make to clothing how much
because you only have a certain amount
of labour and you have a set of desires
and so empty society allocate labor one
way or another for Marx the value of a
commodity simply meant the amount
of the total labor a society had that
was allocated to the production of that
good
that's a definitional logic which he
then used to explain why prices are what
they are but there was no equation of
price to value let me go back to the
first part of your question has there
been lots of criticism of the labor
theory value absolutely there's been
lots of criticism about virtually
everything Marx ever wrote because of
what happened in the years since but
that's true of every theory of value for
example the the mainstream one that is
taught in the United States has a
different name I don't know if you've
heard of it's called the utility theory
of value things are valuable because of
the amount of utility they provide to
the consumer try please to measure that
please come on
you're all smart folks you think that's
an easier concept to nail down the
utility theory of value exactly how much
joy does that ice-cream provide for you
how much money are you willing to part
with will that vary with the temperature
outside will it vary with the amount of
calories you're counting what every
economic theory begins with the set of
basic hypotheses upon which it builds
its system mark started with labor
because for him that was the key
variable to focus on neoclassical
economics which developed the 1870s for
those of you who know was itself a
reaction against Marx they hated the
labor theory of value because it was
associated with Marx they forgot to let
me make sure you all know that Marx did
not invent the labor theory of value
Marx took the labor theory of value this
may come as a shock to some of you but
just do the work you'll learn Adam Smith
and David Ricardo champions of
capitalism that's where the labor theory
of value comes from Marx thanks them
profusely for it and then uses it to do
things they never wanted to see done
this is very happens often in science
the people who develop a concept then
get very upset with where their students
take it Marx was a student of Smith in
Ricardo took the Labour theory of value
in a way that was critical of capitalism
they had used it to celebrate capitalism
but if you see a lot of criticisms of
the labor theory of value be careful
what these are criticisms of because
Marx's labor theory of value is not the
same as Ricardo's and not the same as
Smith's and has more to do with this
notion of how labor is allocated in a
society that anything Marx was not they
put another way when I teach in the
American university system we begin by
assuming all students want to understand
the great mystery of economics which is
why is the price of something what it is
why is the price of a hamburger five
dollars and the price of a Mercedes much
more than that and we beat that's very
nice perfectly good to make an economics
built on that question I'm going to now
exaggerate but to make my point Marx
wasn't interested in that and I'm not
either I got many more interesting
things I want to understand about this
economy then why the prices of things
are what they are I understand if you're
a capitalist you are very concerned
about prices but if you're somebody else
you might have all you might be
interested but you might have much
higher priority subjects that you would
Marx is coming at it with a different
agenda and so he starts in a different
place and takes it in a different way by
the way just a footnote so some of you
scholarly types in 2012 a colleague of
mine Steven Resnick and I we did a lot
of work together published a book called
contending economic theories it was an
attempt to create further English
reading public a book that
systematically compares neoclassical
Keynesian and Marxian economics so that
a generation of students would have
something to find if you're at all
interested that's a title contending you
can
Tomic theories neoclassical Keynesian
and Marxian and the publisher is MIT
press in cambridge massachusetts why MIT
because it is the home of the most
prestigious tradition in economics
called Samuel symbol Robert Solow all
kinds of people were there and we wanted
very much to introduce the profession
through a publisher that they all
respect to deal with an argument that
most of them do not understand hey thank
you so we make a point like that is
going to die and we're probably going to
be better off if we kill you sooner than
many times now you said that that's my
interpretation of your culture and so
now you also said that we don't teach
the generation the issues and I'm
curious about yourself about is that do
you think there is potential to get
quicker to a better solution if we were
to teach the younger generation things
properly and make it clearer and when I
say education I'm not talking about
education okay so that they are about
the start father and talking about
education up to the intramural YouTube
and relax absolutely then it could not I
I couldn't say it as strongly as I want
to say it yes that's why I'm here that's
what I now do I try to teach critical
thinking in the realm of economics look
we let me be as blunt as I know how this
country has been like a bear hibernating
for half a century
it's very serious for half a century
since the 1950s and the world war two
basically this country has been so
freaked out about its Cold War struggles
with socialism communism and all the
rest that it took the pathetic position
of a three-year-old
you know a three-year-old sees a scary
thing puts his or her hands
in front of his or her eyes and believes
that the scary thing is now gone and it
takes a little further maturity to
recognize it you can put your hand there
two things still air and when you move
your hand full we are in a society that
has not dealt seriously with the
criticism of capitalism in 50 years I
once had a graduate student I said go
read the Congressional Record the
literal record of every debate in the
House of Representatives in the Senate
and find me a debate over the pros and
cons of capitalism could find it we have
not allowed a political leader we have
not allowed economics as a profession
which is my profession to have people
like me the only real would be be real
personal and honest I'm a professor I've
been a professor all my life in the
United States despite my criticisms and
that's because unlike a game player when
I'm in trouble and I need help I waive
my pedigrees you all know what I mean I
went to the right schools so I'm in the
club even though I say strange things
I'm critical a sad and our country and
our society are weaker because we do not
have a tradition of critical thinking
which we badly need in a system that's
working as poorly as the current one is
and is likely to continue those of you
who remember what I said that the
average in the history of capitalism is
four to seven years since the last
downturn our major downturn was in 2008
and 2009 now you do the addition four to
seven years old we're due for what at
Wall Street weights one you think we
have trouble in United States with Trump
now make Trump plus a recession over the
next 12 months and try to ask the
question again
this is a system whose instability rocks
it and yes I think education that would
open people to the enormous and
productive and sophisticated literature
that explores these critical
perspectives would be an enormous
contribution to solving the problem I
thank you for honk I find it very
refreshing because I'm from China and
six years ago when I came to the United
States I really hated my country system
now that I look back the the great
achievement that my country has made I
find that oh probably there's some
problem in the United States or in the
Western West Western world in general
which is you know those capitalistic
countries have great economic systems
but the political system is really
backward or Heaven hasn't been updated
regularly so and you can see this from
the amount of debt that the United
States has I think it's like nine
trillion US dollars
in China we have four trillion u.s.
dollars in people's savings ends up now
so the economy is really booming but
what I find in your talk is your you
know your perspective is a little bit
too extreme it's definitely uh I think
what what my country did well was we
find a really good balance point between
efficiency and equality
actually those two are you know two
different forces so if you have better
efficiency it's really hard to get
equality so my question is how how would
you suggest the current you know in the
current state you have this government
you have this
political system in your hand how would
you suggest those people people who make
those decisions to move forward into a
more appropriate point where equality
meets efficiently and if any one of you
if you haven't been to China please go
there it's an amazing world I wonder if
you have ever been to China not yet okay
I think it's the right time to visit
China okay let me right now let me
respond some facts and then an
interpretation of what's happening in
your country facts to underscore what
you have said for example the real wage
in the United States has been stagnant
now for 35 years let me drive home what
that is so you all understand real wage
in economics is a very simple measure
you take the amount of money a person
gets on average and you adjust it for
the prices that the person has to pay
because obviously if you get 10% more
wages but all the prices go up 10
percent you're not better off you can't
buy any more with your extra 10% of
money than you could before because the
prices have gone up the term real wage
takes that into account so it measures
what you really can buy with whatever
the wages are that you get when you do
that the American real wage over the
last 35 years
is the same well it's going to be
started with you real wages in the
United States are the same today they
were late in the 1970s the only reason
Americans have had been able to consume
a rising amount in the last 70 years is
because of two things they did and for
those of you who don't know this is your
life I'm talking about number one a vast
social change happened and it is about
women particularly white in our country
white women
who had left in in the millions lives as
homemakers wives mothers and so on and
become members of the paid labor for so
much so that your generation I would
guess um simply assumes it but that's
new that's how the family had enough
money to sustain the illusion that they
were participating in the American Dream
because every household every married
couple now had a second major money
earner but it turned out it wasn't
enough it wasn't enough because when
mother or wife went out to work in
massive numbers she needed her own
outfit for that she needed a second car
because we don't do public
transportation in his country it's
against our religion and so on that was
that was an attempt at humor there what
I just did okay so the second thing
Americans working-class did to sustain
the illusion was you will no debt we
borrow for our house we borrow for our
car we borrow for the credit card and in
a stunning inhalation of American
capitalism over the last 25 years we
borrow to send our children to college
producing a level of debt indebtedness
that is explosive and which explains
part of why we crashed in 2008 and why
it is taking so long to recover we can't
handle our economic system by contrast
real wages in China have increased many
times over the last 20 years there's no
comparison the working-class standard of
living in China is looming by comparison
to here China's GDP grows in the
neighborhood of six to nine depending on
how you count percent a year we're lucky
if we get two to three percent year
after year that's why the two economies
are getting closer and closer because
we're slow and they're fast and you can
tend all you want and boy Americans are
good at that but that's a reality and
somewhere you have to deal with that
number two point in response China is
taking advantage understandably of
something much bigger than China there
is a decision made in the Centers of
capitalism that the places in the world
where capitalism was born and grew to
its modern power and those places are
Western Europe North America and Japan
those places as capitalism grew in these
areas where it first got going and
became bigan that's where it put its
industry that's where it put its
warehouses that's where its put its
offices and its stores it's what you all
know you're living in New York but along
the way it had to come to terms with the
working-class and what it did was offer
them higher wages and so the wages here
rose not as fast as the profits but they
rose to keep the system going because
the inequality if you let it get too
much blows the system up so a point was
reached around the 1970s when something
happened to change everything American
capitalists looked at their
working-class paying them the kinds of
salaries that enable the American
working class to have the standard of
living it enjoys but they also
discovered in the 1970s the jet engine
and modern telecommunications and
suddenly something was possible that had
never been possible before for
corporations capitalists to say to
themselves the following why the hell
are we in the United States or Britain
or France or Japan we can now supervise
production in a factory in China or
India or Brazil with modern
telecommunications as easily as we could
before supervise the factory across the
street and we can fly anywhere in the
world in a matter of hours
so our managers can we don't need the
American
working-class who we overpay and we're
out of here we're leaving capitalism
over the last 40 years has abandoned the
countries in which it was born and
reached its maturity and where did it go
to the countries in the world that gave
the greatest reason to bring them China
number one a disciplined working class a
pretty well-educated working class a
politically controlled working class and
a cheap working class by comparison to
the west and of course the capitalist
maximizing profit because that's what
this system works with they went they
still going in massive numbers China is
where capitalism is succeeding and we
here in America are facing a very very
traumatic problem our capitalism is
declining there are pockets that are not
Google's probably wonderful but the
largest society in which Google too has
to survive is a society that is
experiencing cutbacks of job opportunity
cutbacks of income cutbacks of
government services everywhere Western
Europe North America and Japan the
political implications we're just at the
beginning of understanding but it's
going to traumatize and trouble all of
our lives for the rest of our lives
China is where capitalism is new where
it's going where it's growing we live in
a part of the world of capitalism where
it isn't and that we are not prepared
for because that no one has prepared the
American people or the people of Western
Europe or Japan which is why the trauma
of politics is becoming so
violent as this is slowly dawning on
people and they look to blame somebody a
favorite one is of course immigrants
let's pretend it's all them who somehow
barter but we've just kick them out
won't solve anything but kick out the
old politicians and bring in mr. Trump
doesn't solve anything either don't mr.
Trump that won't sell will it be either
because you're not dealing with what the
underlying realities are that it
provoked all of this situation but I do
believe that China is mostly the
beneficiary of the transformation of
capitalism and will suffer it's already
suffering but will suffer as capitalism
moves its center to those parts of the
world it brings with it all of the
history of turbulent class struggles
that we know from what happened in
Western Europe North America and Japan
so I would be a little more cautious
about the future of Japan but without
denying that they are where capitalism
is a billion where capitalism is growing
we aren't we only sustain the illusion
the last 40 years by having women go to
work and borrowing like there's no
tomorrow but you don't need an advanced
degree in economics to understand if the
wages are flat the real wage that
American working class has while it
borrows more and more a day will come
when you don't have enough wealth to
service the debt to pay it off and when
that happens it crashes and that's for
200 2008 what if capitalism was what's
coming to China as I believe it is both
Chinese and foreign the instabilities
and inequalities of capitalism
everywhere else will descend upon China
- just a footnote last year there were
more new millionaires in China than
there were
in the United States it's in a country
that's much poorer than the United
States gotta wonder where does that go
but that's the typical story of
capitalist with sorry relocation thank
you for coming thank you all very much
however let's say we do have put
democracy
you